# Data availability

When your dataset is published, the **metadata** will be always immediately publicly
visible on Zenodo. This includes details of the data fields, the spatial scope, the date
range and the like.

You will also need to set the dataset access rights (see
[here](data_format/summary.md#access-status)). We prefer that as much data as possible
is submitted as **Open access** but support two alternative access models:

## Embargoed data

If you want to restrict access to the data while you work on papers, then you can
specify an **Embargo period** of up to two years. The metadata will still be visible, so
that researchers can see that the data exists but any data files will only become
available once the embargo date has passed.

Obviously, you can choose to provide embargoed data to other researchers within the
embargo period. If researchers contact the SAFE Project for access to data during the
embargo period, we will **always** pass the request on to you.

## Restricted data

There are possible rare cases where a dataset may be published as a Restricted dataset.
You must [contact us](mailto:data@safeproject.net) in advance to explain why you think
restriction is appropriate: we will **never** publish a restricted dataset without
discussion.

Restricted datasets must provide a set of access conditions, which will be visible on
Zenodo along with the dataset metadata. Zenodo provides a link to request access to
restricted datasets: these will come first to our data curation account but we will then
**always** contact the original data owners before permitting access.

## Altering the access rights

We are able to alter the access rights of a published dataset, so if you want to alter
the access rights of a dataset, for example to release an embargo or to remove
restrictions, then [email us](mailto:data@safeproject.net).

## Data curation

All of the data submitted through SAFE is published through a single  Zenodo account
(`the_safe_project`). This central account is purely used for data curation so that we
can always access datafiles, update records and act as a final point of contact for
data. This helps us ensure the long-term availability and maintenance of the SAFE data
repository.

This is entirely separate from the authorship and ownership of the data: the citation
for the data will always be to the original set of authors provided in the metadata. We
will never make embargoed or restricted data available within the embargo period or
without discussion with data authors. We will always consult data authors about issues
arising with their datasets.
