# Updating the metadata server

Running a metadata server is the most complex part of the `safedata` system. It involves
setting up and configuring a website and database and so requires further skills and
resources. There are real advantages in running a metadata server: it makes your data
much easier to find and use throught the `safedata` R package.

However, you may choose to get started with using the `safedata_validator` system alone
to ensure data standards and publish the datasets. You can always set up a server and
populate it further down the line. Ideally, you should hang on to the dataset metadata
files that are generated by `safedata_validate` and the Zenodo metadata files from
publishing datasets. Both of these files can be recreated though, by [re-running the
validation](./validating_datasets.md) on published datasets or using the
[`safedata_zenodo get_deposit`
subcommand](../command_line_tools/safedata_zenodo.md#the-get_deposit-subcommand) to
re-download the Zenodo metadata.

## Posting data for new published datasets

If you are maintaining a `safedata` metadata server then, after a dataset has been
published, you should post the metadata to the server to make it discoverable using the
`safedata` package. You will need to have configured `safedata_validator` to include the
required [metadata server
information](../install/configuration.md#metadata-configuration) but then the
[`safedata_metadata` command](../command_line_tools/safedata_metadata.md)
line usage is:

```sh
# Post the zenodo and dataset metadata to the metadata server
safedata_server post_metadata zenodo_1143714.json Example.json
```

## Updating the server resources

The metadata server is also used to distribute some of the validation resources used
both `safedata_validator` and `safedata`, including the
[gazetteer](../install/gazetteer.md) and the [Project ID
database](../install/configuration.md#validation-configuration). When you update these
resources for validation locally, those new data also need to be posted to the metadata
server. There are no command line arguments for this command - it simply updates the
server to the existing configuration file.

```sh
safedata_server update_resources
```
